I am writing out this memo to get into the mindset of coding properly for our research questions and really groking what we want to learn as part of this investigation. I think there have been a lot of emergent themes and questions which arose as part of our research but generally they have been somewhat ineffable to me or just barely attached on the edge of my awareness as I focused on the more technical aspects of this work: setting up interviews, transcribing, managing all this software for coding etc. I hope to meaningfully describe observed patterns in the data so I will describe how our questions relate to what I recall from these interviews.

For the first question, "What factors lead to remembering dimensions/aspects of the data?"  Our hypothesis for this was that the proximity of need or usage of data may inform what dimensions/aspects of the data a participant may focus on.  As I reflect on the interviews we experienced, this did not hold true for specific aspects/dimensions of the data as clearly as I would have liked. There was a little consensus about what was a "major aspect" of the data was, although some broader ways of characterizing the data emerged. It may be valid to break them up into a few broad models, but the specific characteristics that decide these models are unclear without coding. It's unclear to me that any causal link between (anything) and what aspects/dimensions of the data are remembered is clear. Outside of the fact that most people seemed to remember Metadata ad-hoc and failed to characterize it as part of the overall dataset.

Our hypothesis on this was that the elements of the data mental model which occurred in relation to [EnsembleAPI] were going to be rather concrete and fixed. This did not hold. In some instances, the data mental model was highly visual and specifically constructed as an analysis chart. In others the model was very data-structure oriented. Basically the way that data would be reflected in-code. My understanding of connections between multi-typology data is pretty limited at this juncture. Remember to code for this (although there should be some evidence of how one relates to the other in the drawings). As I recall, there was very little arrow-drawing/connecting data; nothing like encapsulation metaphors either. Just free-floating tables or drawings of visualizations.

Re: the question, "How do people summarize big datasets for communication of shape," I do not recall a specific hypothesis I had on this one, but I believe we attempted to capture aspects of this with the drawing questions. We but "shape" I'm not sure we got that. I will have to keep track of things like prepositions. 

An emergent insight/question which evolved from our interviews was on the nature of people's conceptions of metadata in complex datasets. I will want to keep track of allusions to metadata and also monitor where we ask users about where metadata fits into their model. Even in cases where metadata is included in our model, there is a very broad definition of what is and what is not metadata. Logically measured data (output from the experiment) or metrics derived therefrom should be data ; however if it is "per-profile" level of granularity it's heaped into a catch-all class of metadata. The purposes and utility of many data values called metadata are extremely disparate as evidenced by mental models where participants demonstrate an expectation to use some metadata values as an x axis vs y axis in a chart or what have you. I should emphasize in my codes implications of the usage of metadata. 

We developed a more focused question to understand the weaknesses of the particular data structure this group developed. I think the responses to this are varied but may have some broad similarities. Coding for this should be easy TBH since it's contained in a single question that was very specific.

The following question "What portions of an ensemble dataset are more relevant/less relevant to. . . etc."  would be addressed by our question asking users to rank/organize the data. As anticipated there was often a lot of "it depends" couching however in many instances there was evidence of data supremacy as metadata was relegated to an implicitly critical piece in drawings and descriptions where needed but otherwise considered irrelevant. 

I'm not sure how to code for diversity of data structure understanding. . . but I will keep this in mind.